Updates for 2.2.0 (#153)
hpe-storage/scod: docs/csi_driver/operations.md

[TOC]    

## Migrate Encrypted Volumes

Persistent volumes created with v2.1.1 or below using [volume encryption](using.md#using_volume_encryption), the CSI driver use LUKS2 (WikiPedia: [Linux Unified Key Setup](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linux_Unified_Key_Setup)) and can't expand the `PersistentVolumeClaim`. With v2.2.0 and above, LUKS1 is used and the CSI driver is capable of expanding the `PVC`. 

This procedure migrate (copy) data from LUKS2 to LUKS1 PVCs to allow expansion of the volume. 

!!! note
    It's not a limitation of LUKS2 to not allow expansion but rather how the CSI driver interact with the host.

### Assumptions

These are the assumptions made throughout this procedure.

- Data to be migrated has a good backup to restore to, not just a snapshot.
- HPE CSI Driver for Kubernetes v2.2.0 or later installed.
- Worker nodes with access to the Quay registry and SCOD.
- Access to the commands `kubectl`, `curl`, `jq` and `yq`.
- Cluster privileges to manipulate `PersistentVolumes`.
- None of the commands executed should return errors or have non-zero exit codes.
- Only `ReadWriteOnce` `PVCs` are covered.
- No custom `PVC` annotations.

!!! note

>     While these steps are constrained, the workflow remain principally the same if any of these assumptions can't be fulfilled in the particular target environment.

Reviewer: This line is a bit confusing. Maybe reword?

### Prepare the Workload and Persistent Volume Claims

> First, identify the `PersistentVolume` to migrate from and set a shell variables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, identify the `PersistentVolume` to migrate from and set a shell variable.
```

```text
export OLD_SRC_PVC=<insert your existing PVC name here>
export OLD_SRC_PV=$(kubectl get pvc -o json | \
       jq -r ".items[] | \
        select(.metadata.name | \
        test(\"${OLD_SRC_PVC}\"))".spec.volumeName)
```
!!! important
    Ensure these shell variables are set at all times.

> In order to copy data out from a `PVC` the running workload needs to be disassociated with the `PVC`. It's not possible to scale the replicas to zero, the exception being `ReadWriteMany` `PVCs` but that could lead to data inconsistency problems and these procedures assumes application consistency by having the workload shut down.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to copy data out of a `PVC`, the running workload needs to be disassociated with the `PVC`. It's not possible to scale the replicas to zero, the exception being `ReadWriteMany` `PVCs` which could lead to data inconsistency problems. These procedures assumes application consistency by having the workload shut down.
```

> It's out of scope for this procedure how to shut down the particular workload. Ensure there are no `volumeattachments` associated with the `PersistentVolume`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's out of scope for this procedure to demonstrate how to shut down a particular workload. Ensure there are no `volumeattachments` associated with the `PersistentVolume`.
```

```text
kubectl get volumeattachment -o json | \
 jq -r ".items[] | \
  select(.spec.source.persistentVolumeName | \
  test(\"${OLD_SRC_PV}\"))".spec.source
```

!!! tip

>     For large `volumeMode: Filesystem` `PVCs` where copying data may take days, it's recommended to use the [Optional Workflow with Filesystem Persistent Volume Claims](#optional_workflow_with_filesystem_persistent_volume_claims) that utilize the `PVC` `dataSource` capability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For large `volumeMode: Filesystem` `PVCs` where copying data may take days, it's recommended to use the [Optional Workflow with Filesystem Persistent Volume Claims](#optional_workflow_with_filesystem_persistent_volume_claims) that utilizes the `PVC` `dataSource` capability.
```

Edit and set the shell variables for the newly created `PVC`.

```text
export NEW_DST_PVC_SIZE=32Gi
export NEW_DST_PVC_VOLMODE=Filesystem
export NEW_DST_PVC=new-pvc
export NEW_DST_PV=$(kubectl get pvc -o json | \
       jq -r ".items[] | \
       select(.metadata.name | \
       test(\"${NEW_DST_PVC}\"))".spec.volumeName)
```

!!! hint
    The `PVC` name "new-pvc" is a placeholder name. When the procedure is done, the `PVC` will have its original name restored.

##### Important Validation Steps 

At this point, there should be six shell variables declared. Example:

```text
$ env | grep _PV
NEW_DST_PVC_SIZE=32Gi
NEW_DST_PVC=new-pvc
OLD_SRC_PVC=old-pvc <-- This should be the original name of the PVC
NEW_DST_PVC_VOLMODE=Filesystem
NEW_DST_PV=pvc-ad7a05a9-c410-4c63-b997-51fb9fc473bf
OLD_SRC_PV=pvc-ca7c2f64-641d-4265-90f8-4aed888bd2c5
```

Regardless of the `retainPolicy` set in the `StorageClass`, ensure the `persistentVolumeReclaimPolicy` is set to "Retain" for both `PVs`.

```text
kubectl patch pv/${OLD_SRC_PV} pv/${NEW_DST_PV} \
 -p '{"spec":{"persistentVolumeReclaimPolicy":"Retain"}}'
```

!!! caution "Dataloss Warning"

>     It's **EXTREMELY** important no errors are returned from the above command. It **WILL** lead to dataloss.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    It's **EXTREMELY** important no errors are returned from the above command. It **WILL** lead to data loss.
```

Validate the "persistentVolumeReclaimPolicy".

```text
kubectl get pv/${OLD_SRC_PV} pv/${NEW_DST_PV} -o json | \
 jq -r ".items[] | \
  select(.metadata.name)".spec.persistentVolumeReclaimPolicy
```

!!! important
    The above command should output nothing but two lines with the word "Retain" on it.

### Copy Persistent Volume Claim and Reset

> In this phase the data will be copied from the original `PVC` to the new `PVC` with a `Job` submitted to the cluster. Different tools are being used to perform the copy operation, ensure to pick the correct `volumeMode`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this phase, the data will be copied from the original `PVC` to the new `PVC` with a `Job` submitted to the cluster. Different tools are being used to perform the copy operation, ensure to pick the correct `volumeMode`.
```

```text
kubectl get job.batch/pvc-copy-file -o jsonpath='{.status.succeeded}'
kubectl logs job.batch/pvc-copy-file
```

Delete the `Job` from the cluster.

```text
kubectl delete job.batch/pvc-copy-file
```

Proceed to [restart the workload](#restart_the_workload).

#### PVCs with volumeMode: Block

```text
curl -s {{ config.site_url}}csi_driver/examples/operations/pvc-copy-block.yaml | \
  yq "( select(.spec.template.spec.volumes[] | \
    select(.name == \"src-pv\") | \
    .persistentVolumeClaim.claimName = \"${OLD_SRC_PVC}\")
    " | kubectl apply -f-
```

Wait for the `Job` to complete.

```text 
kubectl get job.batch/pvc-copy-block -w
```

!!! hint
    Data is copied block for block, verbatim, regardless of how much application data is stored in the block devices.

Once the `Job` has completed, validate exit status and log files.

```text
kubectl get job.batch/pvc-copy-block -o jsonpath='{.status.succeeded}'
kubectl logs job.batch/pvc-copy-block
```

Delete the `Job` from the cluster.

```text
kubectl delete job.batch/pvc-copy-block
```

Proceed to [restart the workload](#restart_the_workload).

### Restart the Workload

> This step requires that both the old source `PVC` and the new destination `PVC` to be deleted. Once again, ensure the correct `persistentVolumeReclaimPolicy` is set on the `PVs`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This step requires both the old source `PVC` and the new destination `PVC` to be deleted. Once again, ensure the correct `persistentVolumeReclaimPolicy` is set on the `PVs`.
```

If there's a lot of content (millions of files, terabytes of data) that needs to be transferred in a `volumeMode: Filesystem` `PVC` it's recommended to transfer content incrementally. This is achieved by substituting the "old-pvc" with a `dataSource` clone of the running workload and perform the copy from the clone onto the "new-pvc".

After the first transfer completes, the copy job may be recreated as many times as needed with a fresh clone of "old-pvc" until the downtime window has shrunk to an acceptable duration. For the final transfer, the actual source `PVC` will be used instead of the clone.

This is an example `PVC`.

```text
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: clone-of-pvc
spec:
  dataSource:
    name: this-is-the-current-prod-pvc
    kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteOnce
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 32Gi
```

!!! tip
    The capacity of the `dataSource` clone must match the original `PVC`.

Enabling and setting up the CSI snapshotter and related `CRDs` is not necessary but it's recommended to be familiar with using [CSI snapshots](csi_driver/using.md#using_csi_snapshots).

## Upgrade NFS Servers 

> In the event of where the CSI driver contains updates to the NFS Server Provisioner, any running NFS server needs to be updated manually. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the event the CSI driver contains updates to the NFS Server Provisioner, any running NFS server needs to be updated manually. 
```

### Upgrade to v2.2.0

Any prior deployed NFS servers may be upgraded to v2.2.0.

#### Assumptions

- HPE CSI Driver or Operator v2.2.0 installed.
- All running NFS servers are running in the "hpe-nfs" `Namespace`.
- Worker nodes with access to the Quay registry and SCOD.
- Access to the commands `kubectl`, `yq` and `curl`.
- Cluster privileges to manipulate resources in the "hpe-nfs" `Namespace`.
- None of the commands executed should return errors or have non-zero exit codes.

!!! seealso
    If NFS `Deployments` are scattered across `Namespaces`, use the [Validation](#validation) steps to find where they reside.

#### Patch Running NFS Servers

> When patching the NFS `Deployments` the `Pods` will restart and cause a pause in I/O for the NFS clients having active mounts. The clients will recover gracefully once the NFS `Pod` is running again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When patching the NFS `Deployments`, the `Pods` will restart and cause a pause in I/O for the NFS clients with active mounts. The clients will recover gracefully once the NFS `Pod` is running again.
```
